
Internet-Draft                                                  ARDP
Intended status: Informational                              ARDP-01
Expires: July 2026                                         January 2026

        Agent Registration and Discovery Protocol (ARDP)

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as “work in progress.”

Abstract

   This document specifies the Agent Registration and Discovery Protocol
   (ARDP), a lightweight protocol for registering, discovering, and
   reaching autonomous software agents in distributed and federated
   environments. ARDP provides stable agent identities, dynamic endpoint
   resolution, capability advertisement (including protocol selection
   among MCP, A2A, HTTP, and gRPC), minimal presence signaling, and a
   security-first discovery control plane. ARDP is transport-agnostic
   and complementary to existing agent interaction protocols.

Table of Contents
   1. Introduction
   2. Design Goals
   3. Terminology
   4. Architecture Overview
   5. Agent Identity
   6. Registration Model
   7. Discovery and Resolution
   8. Capabilities
   9. Presence and Health
   10. Security Considerations
   11. Federation
   12. Relationship to Existing Protocols
   13. Wire Format Sketch (Non-Normative)
   14. IANA Considerations
   15. Capability Schema v0
   16. Open Issues
   17. References

1. Introduction

   The proliferation of autonomous and semi-autonomous software agents
   introduces challenges in discoverability, reachability, and
   interoperability. Agents may be ephemeral, mobile across execution
   environments, and implemented by heterogeneous vendors.

   ARDP addresses:
   * Stable addressing of agents whose runtime location changes
   * Authorized discovery by identity and declared capabilities
   * Capability-driven selection among interaction protocols
     (e.g., MCP, A2A, HTTP, gRPC)
   * Minimal, privacy-aware presence signaling

2. Design Goals

   1. Stable Identity
   2. Dynamic Reachability
   3. Minimalism (control plane only)
   4. Security by Default
   5. Federation-Friendly
   6. Extensibility

3. Terminology

   Agent
      Autonomous software entity capable of initiating and receiving
      interactions.

   Agent Identifier (AID)
      Stable, namespaced identifier of the form:
         agent:<local-id>@<domain>

   Registrar
      Service that accepts agent registrations and maintains bindings.

   Resolver
      Service that resolves an AID to active endpoints.

   Endpoint
      Network location and protocol tuple through which an agent can be
      reached.

   Capability
      Declarative description of supported protocols and interaction
      modes.

4. Architecture Overview

   ARDP defines a logical control plane composed of registrars and
   resolvers. Agents register their presence and capabilities with a
   registrar. Authorized clients query resolvers to obtain endpoint and
   capability information.

5. Agent Identity

   Each agent SHALL have a unique AID. The domain component denotes the
   administrative authority responsible for the identity.

   Agents MUST prove control of an AID during registration using
   cryptographic credentials bound to that identity.

5.1. AID Syntax

   An ARDP Agent Identifier (AID) MUST follow this grammar:

   aid        = "agent:" local-id "@" authority
   local-id   = 1*( ALPHA / DIGIT / "_" / "-" / "." / "/" )
   authority  = dns-name / internal-name / opaque-authority
   dns-name   = IDNA2008 label "." IDNA2008 label *( "." IDNA2008 label )
   internal-name = 1*( ALPHA / DIGIT / "-" / "." )
   opaque-authority = "tenant-" 1*( ALPHA / DIGIT / "-" )

5.2. Canonical Form

   The canonical AID string is:
   1) "agent:" literal prefix in lowercase.
   2) authority normalized to lowercase using IDNA2008; internal-name is
      lowercased as-is.
   3) local-id is case-sensitive and MUST be preserved as sent.
   4) AIDs MUST be compared using the canonical form.

6. Registration Model

6.1. REGISTER

   A REGISTER request includes:
   * AID
   * One or more endpoints
   * Capability document (versioned)
   * TTL
   * Cryptographic proof

   Registrations are soft-state and MUST be refreshed before expiration.

6.2. DEREGISTER

   An agent MAY explicitly remove its registration.

6.3. Registration Semantics

   Registration is idempotent on (aid, binding_id).
   If a client sends the same (aid, binding_id), the server MUST treat it
   as a refresh.
   If a client sends the same aid with a different binding_id, the server
   MUST return 409 unless the client has "registry:override" scope.

6.4. TTL and Refresh

   The server MUST be authoritative for expires_at and SHOULD return it
   in responses.
   Clients SHOULD refresh at <= 0.5 * ttl with random jitter.
   The server MUST define and enforce TTL bounds and advertise them in
   /meta.

7. Discovery and Resolution

7.1. RESOLVE

   Resolves an AID to active endpoints and capabilities. Access MUST be
   authorized.

7.2. QUERY

   Allows authorized discovery by capability or namespace. Results
   SHOULD be minimized to prevent metadata leakage.

7.3. Privacy Defaults and Redaction

   By default, query returns only aid and status. Clients MAY request
   full details via a "detail=full" parameter.
   If redaction applies, the server MUST omit restricted fields and
   include "redacted": true in the response.

8. Capabilities

   Capability documents MAY include:
   * Supported protocols (MCP, A2A, HTTP, gRPC)
   * Transport bindings
   * Authentication mechanisms
   * Modalities
   * Rate or cost hints
   * Protocol-specific metadata

   Capabilities are declarative and do not imply authorization.

8.1. Capability Bindings

   Capabilities MUST include protocol-specific bindings when a protocol
   is declared. Examples:
   * MCP: protocol_metadata.mcp.server_info, tool_schemas, version
   * A2A: protocol_metadata.a2a.version, transport, addressing
   * gRPC: protocol_metadata.grpc.services, proto_refs, reflection

9. Presence and Health

   Presence is limited to:
   * online
   * offline
   * degraded

10. Security Considerations

   Threats include identity spoofing, registration poisoning,
   unauthorized discovery, replay and downgrade attacks, and registrar
   compromise.

   Mitigations include cryptographic identity proof, signed
   registrations, strict authorization, rate limiting, and audit
   logging.

10.1. Proof of Control (Mandatory Profile)

   Clients MUST present a JWS-signed proof for register and refresh.
   The signed payload is the canonical JSON of the registration body
   plus:
   - nonce: server-provided nonce
   - issued_at: RFC3339 timestamp

   Servers MUST verify the JWS using a JWKS URL discovered from the
   authority domain or configured per tenant. Replay windows MUST be
   enforced.

10.2. Authorization Scopes

   Operations require scopes:
   - register: registry:register
   - refresh: registry:refresh
   - resolve: registry:resolve
   - query: registry:query
   - deregister: registry:deregister

11. Federation

   Registrars MAY federate across domains via explicit trust
   relationships and policy agreements.

11.1. Federation Profile (Minimum)

   Federation is allowed only between explicit trust anchors.
   Responses from remote registrars MUST include provenance fields:
   origin_authority, origin_registrar_id, origin_signature.
   Caches MUST honor remote TTL and mark records as federated.

12. Relationship to Existing Protocols

   ARDP complements, and does not replace, agent interaction protocols
   such as MCP and A2A.

13. Wire Format Sketch (Non-Normative)

   JSON over HTTPS is shown as an example binding. Alternative encodings
   (e.g., CBOR, gRPC) are possible.

13.1. Error Model

   Servers MUST return errors with:
   - code: stable error code
   - message: human-readable
   - correlation_id: for tracing
   Required codes: invalid_aid, unauthorized, forbidden, conflict,
   not_found, expired.

14. IANA Considerations

14.1. Well-Known URI

   IANA is requested to register the following URI suffix per RFC 8615:

   URI suffix: ardp
   Change controller: IETF
   Specification document(s): This document

14.2. Agent Identifier Namespace

   The "agent:" prefix is used as an internal identifier namespace and
   is not registered as a URI scheme in this version.

15. Capability Schema v0

   A minimal JSON schema for capability documents is provided in the
   accompanying file.

16. Open Issues

   * Capability schema evolution
   * Privacy-preserving discovery
   * Federation bootstrapping

17. References

   RFC 8615: Well-Known URIs
